Human-aligned chess engines are designed to replicate human player behavior across different skill levels, providing more relatable and understandable chess analysis and recommendations. As the field is still in its early stages, there are many open questions regarding the best methods for achieving this goal, as well as the challenges and limitations of these methods. The goal of this thesis is to investigate the potential of two methods for improving human-aligned chess engines, unused in the current state-of-the-art models: behavior stylometry and adversarial training.

Behavior stylometry filters the training data to only include games played in a certain style, thus allowing the model to learn from a more homogeneous dataset and creating a more nuanced engine. Adversarial training, on the other hand, modifies the training process by introducing a discriminator that tries to distinguish between human and engine-generated moves, thus aiming to improve the generator’s predictions. This thesis presents the whole process of implementing these two methods, discussing not just the final results, but also the challenges and insights gained along the way.

The results indicate that while behavior stylometry does not lead to a significant improvement in the model’s accuracy, it does modify the model’s predictions in a way that is consistent with the intended style. Adversarial training proves to be a much more difficult task, not only in its implementation, but also in result predictability and explainability. While the final model yields a discriminator that can distinguish between human and engine-generated moves with high accuracy, the generator’s predictions tend to be blunder-prone, degrading the model’s performance at higher Elo levels.

We discuss the reasons behind these outcomes, alternative solutions, and key insights, advocating psychologically-informed evaluation metrics and training methods as a promising direction for future research in the field of human-aligned engines.